



Network Working Group                                          T. Jensen
Internet-Draft                                              J. Krynitsky
Intended status: Informational                                 Microsoft
Expires: 9 April 2025                                          J. Damick
                                                              M. Engskow
                                                                  Amazon
                                                                J. Abley
                                                              Cloudflare
                                                          6 October 2024


        Client Authentication Recommendations for Encrypted DNS
                          draft-tjjk-cared-00

Abstract

   Some encrypted DNS clients require anonymity from their encrypted DNS
   servers to prevent third parties from correlating client DNS queries
   with other data for surveillance or data mining purposes.  However,
   there are cases where the client and server have a pre-existing
   relationship and each wants to prove its identity to the other.  For
   example, an encrypted DNS server may only wish to accept queries from
   encrypted DNS clients that are managed by the same enterprise, and an
   encrypted DNS client may need to confirm the identity of the
   encrypted DNS server it is communicating with.  This requires mutual
   authentication.

   This document discusses the circumstances under which client
   authentication is appropriate to use with encrypted DNS, the benefits
   and limitations of doing so, and recommends authentication mechanisms
   to be used when communicating with TLS-based encrypted DNS protocols.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 9 April 2025.



Jensen, et al.            Expires 9 April 2025                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    CARED                     October 2024


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Conventions and Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Benefits of client authentication with encrypted DNS  . . . .   4
   5.  Drawbacks of client authentication with encrypted DNS . . . .   4
   6.  When to use client authentication with encrypted DNS  . . . .   5
     6.1.  Restricting connections to allowed clients  . . . . . . .   5
       6.1.1.  Resolving names differently per client  . . . . . . .   5
     6.2.  When clients should attempt to authenticate . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     7.1.  Why these requirements were chosen  . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       7.1.1.  Per-connection scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
       7.1.2.  Reusable open standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       7.1.3.  Reusable across protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       7.1.4.  Does not require human interaction  . . . . . . . . .   8
     7.2.  Why alternatives are not recommended  . . . . . . . . . .   8
       7.2.1.  Web tokens  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
       7.2.2.  HTTP authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       7.2.3.  FIDO  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       7.2.4.  Designing a novel solution  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Operational Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     8.1.  Avoiding connectivity deadlocks . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   10. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   11. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     11.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     11.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12






Jensen, et al.            Expires 9 April 2025                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    CARED                     October 2024


1.  Introduction

   There are times when a client needs to authenticate itself before it
   can be authorised to use a DNS server.  One example is when an
   encrypted DNS server only accepts connections from pre-approved
   clients, such as an encrypted DNS service provided by an enterprise
   for its remote employees.  Encrypted DNS clients trying to connect to
   such a server might experience refused connections if they did not
   provide authentication that allows the enterprise's server to
   authorise its use.

   This is different from general use of encrypted DNS by anonymous
   clients to public DNS resolvers, where it is bad practice for the
   client to provide any kind of identifying information to the server.
   For example, Section 8.2 of [RFC8484] discourages use of HTTP cookies
   with DNS over HTTP (DoH).  This ensures that clients provide a
   minimal amount of identifiable or correlatable information to servers
   that do not need to know anything about the client in order to
   provide name resolution.

   Because of the significant difference in these scenarios, it is
   important to define the situations in which interoperable encrypted
   DNS clients can use client authentication without compromising the
   privacy provided by encrypted DNS in the first place.  Even then, it
   is important to recognize what value client authentication provides
   to encrypted DNS clients versus encrypted DNS servers in the context
   of both connection management and DNS resolution utility.  This
   document discusses these topics and recommends best practice for
   authentication.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Terminology

   Encrypted DNS server: a recursive DNS resolver that implements one or
   more encrypted DNS protocols, such as those defined in [RFC9499]
   (DNS-over-TLS, DNS-over-HTTPS, DNS-over-QUIC).








Jensen, et al.            Expires 9 April 2025                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    CARED                     October 2024


   Protective DNS server: a policy-implementing, recursive DNS resolver
   service that filters DNS queries to prevent resolution for known
   malicious domains and/or IP addresses.  Protective DNS servers
   support DNS technologies including encrypted DNS protocol support
   (DoH/DoT) and IPv6 resolution.

   Other terminology related to the DNS is used in this document as
   defined in [RFC9499].

4.  Benefits of client authentication with encrypted DNS

   Strong identification of encrypted DNS clients by the encrypted DNS
   server allows the DNS server to apply client-specific resolution
   policies in a securely-verifiable way.  Today, a common practice is
   to establish client-specific resolution policies that are applied on
   behalf of particular clients based on their observed IP address.
   This is not only an insecure method that cannot account for clients
   sending requests through middleboxes, but it can only be used when
   expected IP addresses are known in advance.  This is not practical
   for enterprises with remote employees without introducing a
   dependency on tunneling DNS traffic to a managed gateway or proxy
   whose IP address is known.  This in turn forces enterprises to choose
   between running proxy or gateway infrastructure per client (or at
   least per-client IP address mappings) or losing client
   identification.

   Strong identification of encrypted DNS clients by the encrypted DNS
   server also brings identification up to the application layer, which
   insulates the mechanism used for identity management from network
   topology changes and allows the sense of client identity in the
   server to persist despite client IP address changes.

5.  Drawbacks of client authentication with encrypted DNS

   While there are benefits in using client authentication with
   encrypted DNS in limited circumstances, authentication has drawbacks
   that make it inappropriate in many other cases.  For example, client
   authentication is generally considered to be bad practice in uses of
   encrypted DNS that are motivated by client anonyminity, since it
   allows a full history of resolution requests to be associated
   confidently with the identity of an individual client.  This is
   unacceptable practice.

   Public DNS servers generally implement allow- and blocklists at the
   IP layer as part of a layered defence against abuse; IP-layer access
   control allows unwanted traffic to be discarded early and helps
   mitigate unwanted server load.  Public encrypted DNS servers with the
   additional requirement to permit authenticated clients makes it



Jensen, et al.            Expires 9 April 2025                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    CARED                     October 2024


   impossible to drop unwanted traffic early based on source IP address,
   which increases the cost of mitigation and adds complexity that may
   well introduce additional attack vectors.

6.  When to use client authentication with encrypted DNS

   Encrypted DNS servers that provide resolution using transport
   protocols that incorporate TLS or dTLS such as DoH [RFC8484], DoT
   [RFC7858], and DoQ [RFC9250] SHOULD NOT provide client authentication
   except in the limited situations described in this section.

   Encrypted DNS servers that use other transport protocols are not in
   scope for this document.

   Encrypted DNS servers MUST NOT challenge clients for authentication
   unless they need to restrict connections to a set of clients they
   have a pre-existing relationship with as defined in {restrict-
   clients}, regardless of whether or not the requirements in {per-
   client} apply.  Encrypted DNS servers that meet the requirements in
   {restrict-clients} MAY challenge clients to authenticate to avoid
   achieving the same goal of identifying clients through other, less
   secure means (such as IP address or data in the DNS query payload).

6.1.  Restricting connections to allowed clients

   An encrypted DNS server that provides resolution to a specific set of
   clients and refuses service to all other clients MAY require clients
   to authenticate.

   For example, an encrypted DNS server owned by an enterprise that only
   allows connections from devices managed by that same enterprise might
   require clients to authenticate.

6.1.1.  Resolving names differently per client

   An encrypted DNS server that provides client-specific resolution
   behaviour MAY require clients to authenticate in circumstances where
   the appropriate policy for particular clients is specified by the
   operator of the encrypted DNS server.

   For example, an encrypted DNS server that is configured to allow some
   clients to resolve certain names while other clients are not allowed
   needs to identify the client so that the resolution behaviour for
   those names can be implemented accurately.







Jensen, et al.            Expires 9 April 2025                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    CARED                     October 2024


   Encrypted DNS servers SHOULD NOT attempt to authenticate clients to
   identify the appropriate resolution policy to use when the difference
   in resolution behavior between them is not imposed by the operator of
   the server but instead is chosen by the client.

   For example, some public encrypted DNS services provide clients with
   the option of blocking resolution requests for particular categories
   of domain names, such as names associated with malware distribution,
   adult content or advertisers, and makes servers with particular
   resolution policies available on different IP addresses.  A client
   who wishes to opt-in to a server with a particular resolution policy
   can do so by sending queries to the corresponding IP address, and no
   client identification is required.

6.2.  When clients should attempt to authenticate

   An encrypted DNS client MUST NOT offer authentication to any
   encrypted DNS server unless it was specifically configured to expect
   that server to require authentication, independent of the mechanism
   by which the client chose or discovered the encrypted DNS server to
   use.

   An encrypted DNS client MUST NOT offer authentication when the server
   connection was established using DDR [RFC9462], even if the IP
   address of the original DNS server was specifically configured for
   the encrypted DNS client as one that might require authentication.
   This is because in that circumstance there is not a pre-existing
   relationship with the encrypted DNS server (or else DDR bootstrapping
   into encrypted DNS would not have been necessary).

   TBD: what to do with EDSR destinations [EDSR-REDIRECTION]

   An encrypted DNS client MAY choose to present authentication to a
   server that requests it, but is not required to do so; for example, a
   client MAY choose instead not to use the server.  If a client does
   present an identity to a server, the identity SHOULD be unique to
   that server, to reduce the risk of a client's resolution history on
   multiple colluding servers being correlated.

7.  Recommendations

   The following requirements were considered when formulating the
   recommended authentication mechanism for encrypted DNS clients.  The
   authentication mechanism:

   1.  SHOULD be per-connection, not per-query, e.g. to avoid
       unnecessary payload overheads




Jensen, et al.            Expires 9 April 2025                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    CARED                     October 2024


   2.  SHOULD use open, standard mechanisms where possible, e.g. to
       avoid vendor lock-in and specialized cryptography

   3.  SHOULD be reusable across multiple encrypted DNS protocols, e.g.
       to avoid protocol preference

   4.  SHOULD NOT require human user interaction to complete
       authentication

   This document concludes that the best mechanism for encrypted DNS
   client authentication is mTLS [RFC8705] for the following reasons:

   1.  mTLS identifies and authenticates clients, not users, per-
       connection

   2.  mTLS is an existing standard and is often readily available for
       TLS clients

   3.  X.509 certificates used for TLS client authentication allow a
       server to include other attributes in an authentication decision,
       such as the client's organization via PKI heiracrchy

   4.  mTLS is reusable across multiple encrypted DNS protocols

   5.  mTLS allows session resumption [RFC8446]

   6.  mTLS does not require user interaction or apaplication layer
       input for authentication

   Encrypted DNS clients and servers that support offering or requesting
   client authentication MUST support at least the use of mTLS in
   addition to whatever other mechanism they wish to support.

   Encrypted DNS clients and servers SHOULD prefer long-lived
   connections when using client authentication to minimize the cost
   over time of doing repeated TLS handshakes and identity verification.

7.1.  Why these requirements were chosen

7.1.1.  Per-connection scope

   Any data added to each DNS message will have greater bandwidth and
   processing costs than presenting authentication once per connection.
   This is especially true in this case because the drawback of having
   long-running encrypted DNS connections is the decreased privacy
   through increased volume of directly correlatable queries.  However,
   this privacy threat does not apply to this situation because the
   client's queries can already be correlated by the identity it



Jensen, et al.            Expires 9 April 2025                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    CARED                     October 2024


   presents.  Therefore, per-connection bandwidth and data processing
   overhead is expected to be much lower than per-query because there is
   no incentive for clients and servers to not have long-running
   encrypted DNS connections.

   This is not expected to create excessive cost for server operators
   because supporting encrypted DNS without client authentication
   already requires per-connection state management.

7.1.2.  Reusable open standards

   Reusing open standards ensures wide interoperability between vendors
   that choose to implement client authentication in their encrypted DNS
   stacks.

7.1.3.  Reusable across protocols

   If a client authentication method for encrypted DNS were defined or
   recommended that would only be usable by some TLS-encrypted DNS
   protocols, it would encourage the development of a second or even
   third solution later.

7.1.4.  Does not require human interaction

   Humans using devices that use encrypted DNS, when given any kind of
   prompt or login relating to establishing encrypted DNS connectivity,
   are unlikely to understand what is happening and why.  This will
   inevitably lead to click-through behavior.  Because the scope of
   scenarios where client authentication for encrypted DNS is limited to
   pre-existing relationships between the client and server, there
   should be no need for at-run-time intervention by a human user.

7.2.  Why alternatives are not recommended

7.2.1.  Web tokens

   OAuth or JSON web tokens alone require HTTP to validate, so would not
   be a solution for encrypted DNS protocols other than DoH.  Web access
   tokens can be used as certificate-bound access tokens in combination
   with mTLS if they are needed to prove identity with another
   authorization server, as described in [RFC8705].










Jensen, et al.            Expires 9 April 2025                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    CARED                     October 2024


7.2.2.  HTTP authentication

   HTTP authentication as defined in [RFC9110] provides a basic
   authentication scheme for the HTTP protocol.  Unless it is used with
   TLS, i.e. over HTTPS, the credentials are encoded but not encrypted
   which is insecure.  As TLS is already used by the encrypted DNS
   protocols in this document's scope, it is simpler to handle client
   authentication and authorization at the TLS layer.  Additionally,
   mTLS is more broadly-adopted than HTTP authentication.  HTTP
   authentication would only be a viable option for DoH, and not
   extensible to other encrypted DNS solutions.

7.2.3.  FIDO

   Web Authentication (WebAuthN) and the FIDO2 Client to Authenticator
   Protocol (CTAP) use CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE),
   described in [RFC8812].  FIDO and WebAuthN are passkey solutions
   designed to replace passwords for user authentication for online
   services, and they are not typically used for general client
   authentication.  Passkeys are unique for each online service and
   require user input for registration, and would require DNS servers to
   support the WebAuthN protocol.  Additionally, each sign-in requires
   user input for local verification, using biometric, local PIN, or a
   FIDO security key.

7.2.4.  Designing a novel solution

   Designing a novel solution is never recommended when there is an
   existing standard that meets the requirements.  Doing so would make
   the encrypted DNS solution more difficult and time-consuming to
   adopt, and most likely would introduce vendor lock-in.

8.  Operational Considerations

8.1.  Avoiding connectivity deadlocks

   Deployers should carefully consider how they will handle certificate
   rollover and revocation.  If an encrypted DNS server only allows
   connections from clients with valid certificates, and the client is
   configured to only use the encrypted DNS server, then there will be a
   deadlock when the certificate expires or is revoked such that the
   client device will not have the connectivity needed to renew or
   replace its certificate.








Jensen, et al.            Expires 9 April 2025                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    CARED                     October 2024


   Encrypted DNS servers that challenge clients for authentication
   SHOULD have a separate resolution policy for clients that do not have
   valid credentials that allows them to resolve the subset of names
   needed to connect to the infrastructure needed to acquire
   certificates.

   Alternatively, encrypted DNS clients that are configured to use
   encrypted DNS servers that will require authentication MAY consider
   configuring knowledge of certificate issuing infrastructure in
   advance so that the DNS deadlock can be avoided without introducing
   less secure DNS servers to their configuration (i.e.  hard coding IP
   addresses and host names for certificate checking).

9.  Security Considerations

   This document describes when and how encrypted DNS clients can
   authenticate themselves to an encrypted DNS server.  It does not
   introduce any new security considerations beyond those of TLS and
   mTLS.  This document does not define recommendations for when and how
   to use encrypted DNS client authentication for encrypted DNS
   protocols that are based on TLS or dTLS.

10.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC9499]  Hoffman, P. and K. Fujiwara, "DNS Terminology", BCP 219,
              RFC 9499, DOI 10.17487/RFC9499, March 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9499>.

11.2.  Informative References







Jensen, et al.            Expires 9 April 2025                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    CARED                     October 2024


   [EDSR-REDIRECTION]
              Todd, J., Jensen, T., and C. Mosher, "Encrypted DNS Server
              Redirection", 2024, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/
              draft-ietf-add-encrypted-dns-server-redirection/>.

   [RFC7858]  Hu, Z., Zhu, L., Heidemann, J., Mankin, A., Wessels, D.,
              and P. Hoffman, "Specification for DNS over Transport
              Layer Security (TLS)", RFC 7858, DOI 10.17487/RFC7858, May
              2016, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7858>.

   [RFC8446]  Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol
              Version 1.3", RFC 8446, DOI 10.17487/RFC8446, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446>.

   [RFC8484]  Hoffman, P. and P. McManus, "DNS Queries over HTTPS
              (DoH)", RFC 8484, DOI 10.17487/RFC8484, October 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8484>.

   [RFC8705]  Campbell, B., Bradley, J., Sakimura, N., and T.
              Lodderstedt, "OAuth 2.0 Mutual-TLS Client Authentication
              and Certificate-Bound Access Tokens", RFC 8705,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8705, February 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8705>.

   [RFC8812]  Jones, M., "CBOR Object Signing and Encryption (COSE) and
              JSON Object Signing and Encryption (JOSE) Registrations
              for Web Authentication (WebAuthn) Algorithms", RFC 8812,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8812, August 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8812>.

   [RFC9110]  Fielding, R., Ed., Nottingham, M., Ed., and J. Reschke,
              Ed., "HTTP Semantics", STD 97, RFC 9110,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9110, June 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110>.

   [RFC9250]  Huitema, C., Dickinson, S., and A. Mankin, "DNS over
              Dedicated QUIC Connections", RFC 9250,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9250, May 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9250>.

   [RFC9462]  Pauly, T., Kinnear, E., Wood, C. A., McManus, P., and T.
              Jensen, "Discovery of Designated Resolvers", RFC 9462,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9462, November 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9462>.







Jensen, et al.            Expires 9 April 2025                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                    CARED                     October 2024


Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Tommy Jensen
   Microsoft
   Email: tojens@microsoft.com


   Jessica Krynitsky
   Microsoft
   Email: jess.krynitsky@microsoft.com


   Jeffrey Damick
   Amazon
   Email: jdamick@amazon.com


   Matt Engskow
   Amazon
   Email: mengskow@amazon.com


   Joe Abley
   Cloudflare
   Email: jabley@cloudflare.com






















Jensen, et al.            Expires 9 April 2025                 [Page 12]
